## Software licenses: introduction

Creative works, like books, paintings and music, but also scientific articles and software, are covered by copyright. Copyright is a legal construct that gives the owner of the copyright on a work the exclusive right to reproduce, modify, publicly perform and distribute the work. As a result, anyone who is not the copyright holder needs to have permission from the copyright holder to also be able to do so. One way a copyright holder can give such permission is to publicly license the work.

Newly created works are automatically covered by copyright. This copyright is owner by the creator of the work, unless they were employed and created the work as part of their employment, in which case their employer owns the work. If multiple persons or organisations contribute to a work, then they each own a share of the copyright, and all need to give permission for others to be able to do any of the things protected by copyright.

Ownership can be transferred by contract. Employment contracts often state explicitly that the copyright of any created works will be owned by the employer. In Europe, certain rights, such as the right to be recognised as the author of the work (if you want to), are inalienable: they cannot be transferred away from the author.

Research scientists are generally employed by universities, so that legally speaking their works are owned by the university they work for. In practice, for example when submitting a paper to a journal, it is often assumed that scientists can transfer copyright ownership or otherwise give permission to the publisher to publish the paper on behalf of the university, but strictly speaking there is usually no legal basis for this. Likewise, if scientists produce software as part of their scientific work, then that software is owned by the university, and publishing it as Open Source software, while often done, does not sit on solid legal footing.

Sharing scientific software offers great possibilities for collaboration, sharing of resources, and increased impact of the scientific work as well as of the software itself. This module gives an overview of the different kinds of Open Source licenses typically used to share and collaboratively develop software, and discusses which policies universities could enact to make it easier for their employees to properly license the software they create.

